WOODRUFF: Now to a major legal
case involving the alleged
smuggling of ancient religious
artifacts.
Late yesterday, the
Department of Justice
said that the nationwide
arts and crafts company
Hobby Lobby illegally
imported thousands of ancient
relics from the Middle East.
William Brangham has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: The government's
complaint against Hobby Lobby
involves the purchase
and importation of 5,500
rare clay tablets and
artifacts from Israel
and the UAE, antiquities that
likely once came from Iraq.
Prosecutors allege that
company missed several
red flags indicating
that this purchase was
highly suspicious.
Hobby Lobby argues this
was an innocent mistake
caused by inexperience.
In an agreement with the Justice
Department, the company must
now turn over all the artifacts
and pay $3 million.
Hobby Lobby is a family-owned
evangelical Christian company.
They were at the center of the
2014 Supreme Court case that
ruled companies can't be forced
to cover birth control for their
employees, and they're also
constructing a multimillion
dollar bible museum here
in Washington, D.C. that
will open this fall.
For more on this case, I'm
joined now by Deborah Lehr.
She's chairman of George
Washington University's
Capitol Archaeological
Institute and she's
founder of the Antiquities
Coalition, which works to stop
the looting of world cultures.
Welcome to the "NewsHour".
Can you tell me just the basics?
What is -- you heard what I said
about the overview of this case.
What is the government alleging
that Hobby Lobby did wrong here?
DEBORAH LEHR, FOUNDER,
ANTIQUITIES COALITION:
The government is alleging
that they imported
knowingly items from
Iraq and that they used
falsified shipping labels
and that they didn't
get the appropriate import
permits to be able to
bring these antiquities
into the country.
BRANGHAM: And what
are these antiquities?
What are the items that
we're talking about?
LEHR: They are things, as you
said, that are destined for
their biblical museum, and they
are clay tablets and cylinder
seals and ancient items that
were part of that time period in
Iraq.
BRANGHAM: So, my understanding
is the company says these were
not destined for the museum,
they said they were just part
of their larger collection.
But the government also argues
that there were all sorts of
red flags that should have
tipped off Hobby Lobby
that this was not an
appropriate purchase to make.
Can you tell us what were
some of those red flags?
LEHR: Absolutely.
First, Hobby Lobby is a
sophisticated importer
and they know very well
that you have to designate
the country of origin and the
appropriate tariff line when
bringing these into the country.
This was not done.
These items, instead of being
declared as antiquities, were
declared as clay tiles or
samples.
They were not noted that they
were coming from Iraq but,
instead, that they were coming
from turkey, and it's no mistake
that we have an agreement with
Iraq that if they were being
brought in and declared coming
from Iraq, they would have
to get an appropriate permit.
Yet, we don't have a similar
type of agreement with Turkey.
They're also coming from a part
of the world where conflict
antiquities are being actually
excavated by groups like Daesh
or ISIS, and knowingly being
exported and used as a means
for funding terrorism.
And so, there are quite a few
red flags that they should have
known, and at a minimum they
should have done provenance
research, which they didn't do.
What they actually paid
five individuals through
seven different accounts
and, as I said, then,
shipped these in different
packets, which might
be understandable, but
to several different
locations in the United States
and without the appropriate
or accurate shipping records.
BRANGHAM: Now, the company
agreed they're going to give
back these items and willing
to pay this $3 million
to the government.
The company argues that they
are new to this business and
that this was really sort of
a rookie mistake, that
inexperience is what
caused these problems,
not any intentional
looking past these
concerns you've raised.
LEHR: Well, that's a very
interesting argument for a group
that has a business that's based
largely on importing into the
country, and it's those two
claims that they are actually
being fined for.
We could understand
potentially that they
may not be sophisticated
about the specifics
of what importing antiquities
from Iraq are involved, but
they are building a museum where
they are importing and
collecting historic items
from around the world.
So, we hope that there are
not other rookie mistakes that
they have made within their
bible museum and the
antiquities that are there.
BRANGHAM: I mean, Hobby Lobby
is certainly not the first
organization or institution
to sort of trip this
particular wire.
I mean, major cultural
institutions in the
United States in the
past have had similar
problems.
I mean, this is -- it's
not an uncommon problem.
LEHR: Well, it's not an uncommon
problem, but we haven't seen
a find quite this large,
and that it's very hard to bring
about these kinds of cases,
though we commend the United
States government and
certainly ICE for the
seizures that they're making.
But the trade in antiquities
and the list of antiquities
is a global problem, and we're
seeing it on the increase as
we see conflict in the Middle
East and -- where there are
millions of sites still
yet to be excavated.
It's very much just an
endless, almost excavation
that's out there for
thieves to take advantage
of.
BRANGHAM: As we mentioned,
they're building this enormous
museum and some of Hobby Lobby's
40,000 other items apparently
are destined to go into this
museum, and other experts
in antiquities have raised
concerns about the speed at
which some of those items were
gathered.
Have you heard
those same concerns?
LEHR: Yes, we've heard those
same concerns and one hopes
they have actually tone the
type of provenance research
that they should be doing to
ensure these are not part of the
illicit trade.
They actually had consulted one
of the leading cultural heritage
lawyers in the case of this
specific import with items
coming of these 5,000 items
who had recommended that they
do a lot more
additional research.
And so, they actually
had ignored the warning
they received from
their own attorney.
BRANGHAM: All right.
Deborah Lehr of the Antiquities
Coalition, thanks so much.
LEHR: Thank you very much.